                                                                                                                                                                        1



                                            Wireless Communications with Unmanned Aerial
                                                             Vehicles: Opportunities and Challenges
                                                                          Yong Zeng, Rui Zhang, and Teng Joon Lim
arXiv:1602.03602v1 [cs.IT] 11 Feb 2016




                                                                                                    Abstract

                                                    Wireless communication systems that include unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) promise to provide cost-
                                               effective wireless connectivity for devices without infrastructure coverage. Compared to terrestrial communications
                                               or those based on high-altitude platforms (HAPs), on-demand wireless systems with low-altitude UAVs are in
                                               general faster to deploy, more flexibly re-configured, and are likely to have better communication channels due
                                               to the presence of short-range line-of-sight (LoS) links. However, the utilization of highly mobile and energy-
                                               constrained UAVs for wireless communications also introduces many new challenges. In this article, we provide
                                               an overview of UAV-aided wireless communications, by introducing the basic networking architecture and main
                                               channel characteristics, highlighting the key design considerations as well as the new opportunities to be exploited.




                                                                                             I. I NTRODUCTION

                                            With their high mobility and low cost, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), also commonly known
                                         as drones or remotely piloted aircrafts, have found a wide range of applications during the past few
                                         decades [1]. Historically, UAVs have been primarily used in the military, mainly deployed in hostile
                                         territory to reduce pilot losses. With the continuous cost reduction and device miniaturization, small
                                         UAVs (typically with weight not exceeding 25 kg) are now more easily accessible to the public and thus
                                         numerous new applications in civilian and commercial domains have emerged, with typical examples
                                         including weather monitoring, forest fire detection, traffic control, cargo transport, emergency search and
                                         rescue, communication relaying, etc [2]. UAVs can be broadly classified into two categories: fixed wing
                                         versus rotary wing, each with their own strengths and weaknesses. For example, fixed-wing UAVs usually
                                         have high speed and heavy payload, but they must maintain a continuous forward motion to remain aloft,

                                           The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore (e-mail: {elezeng,
                                         elezhang, eleltj}@nus.edu.sg).


                                         February 12, 2016                                                                                                         DRAFT
                                                                                                            2


thus are not suitable for stationary applications like close inspection. In contrast, rotary-wing UAVs such
as quadcopters, though having limited mobility and payload, are able to move in any direction as well
as to stay stationary in the air. Thus, the choice of UAVs critically depends on the applications.
   Among the various applications enabled by UASs, the use of UAVs for achieving high-speed wire-
less communications is expected to play an important role in future communication systems. In fact,
UAV-aided wireless communication offers one promising solution to provide wireless connectivity for
devices without infrastructure coverage due to e.g., severe shadowing by urban or mountainous terrain,
or damage to the communication infrastructure caused by natural disasters [3]. Note that besides UAVs,
one alternative solution for wireless connectivity is via high-altitude platforms (HAPs), such as balloons,
which usually operate in the stratosphere that is tens of kilometers above the Earth’s surface. HAP-based
communications have several advantages over the UAV-based low-altitude platforms (LAPs), such as
wider coverage, longer endurance, etc. Thus, HAP is in general preferred for providing reliable wireless
coverage for a large geographic area. However, compared to HAP-based communications, or those based
on terrestrial or satellite systems, wireless communications with low-altitude UAVs (typically at an altitude
not exceeding several kilometers) also have several important advantages. First, on-demand UASs are
more cost-effective and can be much more swiftly deployed, which makes them especially suitable
for unexpected or limited-duration missions. Besides, with the aid of low-altitude UAVs, short-range
line-of-sight (LoS) communication links can be established in most scenarios, which potentially leads
to significant performance improvement over direct communication between source and destination (if
possible) or HAP relaying over long-distance LoS links. In addition, the maneuverability of UAVs offers
new opportunities for performance enhancement, through the dynamic adjustment of UAV state to best
suit the communication environment. Furthermore, adaptive communications can be jointly designed with
UAV mobility control to further improve the communication performance. For example, when a UAV
experiences good channels with the ground terminals, besides transmitting with higher rates, it can also
lower its speed to sustain the good wireless connectivity to transmit more data to the ground terminals.
These evident benefits make UAV-aided wireless communication a promising integral component of future
wireless systems, which need to support more diverse applications with orders-of-magnitude capacity
improvement over the current systems. Fig. 1 illustrates three typical use cases of UAV-aided wireless
communications, which are:
   (a) UAV-aided ubiquitous coverage, where UAVs are deployed to assist the existing communication
infrastructure, if any, in providing seamless wireless coverage within the serving area. Two example


February 12, 2016                                                                                      DRAFT
                                                                                                             3




                    Fig. 1: Three typical use cases of UAV-aided wireless communications.



scenarios are rapid service recovery after partial or complete infrastructure damage due to natural disasters,
and base station offloading in extremely crowded areas, e.g., a stadium in a sports event. Note that the
latter case has been identified as one of the five key scenarios that need to be effectively addressed by
the fifth generation (5G) wireless systems [4].
   (b) UAV-aided relaying, where UAVs are deployed to provide wireless connectivity between two or
more distant users or user groups without reliable direct communication links, e.g., between the frontline
and the command center for emergency responses.
   (c) UAV-aided information dissemination and data collection, where UAVs are despatched to dissemi-

February 12, 2016                                                                                       DRAFT
                                                                                                           4


nate (or collect) delay-tolerant information to (from) a large number of distributed wireless devices, e.g.,
wireless sensors in precision agriculture applications.
   Despite the many promising benefits, wireless communications with UAVs are also faced with several
new design challenges. First, besides the normal communication links as in terrestrial systems, additional
control and non-payload communications (CNPC) links with much more stringent latency and security re-
quirements are needed in UASs for supporting safety-critical functions, such as real-time control, collision
and crash avoidance, etc. This calls for more effective resource management and security mechanisms
specifically designed for UAV communication systems. Besides, the high mobility environment of UASs
generally results in highly dynamic network topologies, which are usually sparsely and intermittently
connected [5]. As a result, effective multi-UAV coordination, or UAV swarm operations, need to be
designed for ensuring reliable network connectivity [6]. At the same time, new communication protocols
need to be designed taking into account the possibility of sparse and intermittent network connectivity.
Another main challenge stems from the size, weight, and power (SWAP) constraints of UAVs, which could
limit their communication, computation, and endurance capabilities. To tackle such issues, energy-aware
UAV deployment and operation mechanisms are needed for intelligent energy usage and replenishment.
Moreover, due to the mobility of UAVs as well as the lack of fixed backhual links and centralized
control, interference coordination among the neighboring cells with UAV-enabled aerial base stations is
more challenging than in terrestrial cellular systems. Thus, effective interference management techniques
specifically designed for UAV-aided cellular coverage are needed.
   The objective of this article is to give an overview of UAV-aided wireless communications. The
basic networking architecture, main channel characteristics and design considerations, as well as the
key performance enhancing techniques that exploit the UAV’s mobility will be presented.


                               II. BASIC N ETWORKING A RCHITECTURE

   Fig. 2 shows the generic networking architecture of wireless communications with UAVs, which consists
of two basic types of communication links, namely the CNPC link and the data link.


A. Control and Non-Payload Communications Link

   The CNPC links are essential to ensure the safe operation of all UASs. Highly reliable, low-latency,
and secure two-way communications, usually with low data rate requirement, must be supported by these
links for exchanging safety-critical information among UAVs, as well as between the UAV and ground


February 12, 2016                                                                                     DRAFT
                                                                                                       5


                                            Primary
                                           CNPC Link         Satellite
                                           Secondary
                                           CNPC Link
                                           Data Link




                                                       UAV                      UAV




                                    Ground Control
                                                             Ground Terminals
                                       Station




                    Fig. 2: Basic networking architecture of UAV-aided wireless communications.



control stations (GCS), e.g., dedicated mobile terminals mounted on ground vehicles. The main CNPC
information flow can be broadly categorized into three types: i) command and control from GCS to UAVs;
ii) aircraft status report from UAVs to ground; iii) sense-and-avoid information among UAVs. Even for
autonomous UAVs, which are able to accomplish missions relying on onboard computers without real-
time human control, the CNPC links are also necessary in case emergency human intervention is needed.
Not shown in Fig. 2 are the air traffic control (ATC) links, which are necessary only when the UAVs are
within a controlled airspace, e.g., near an airport.
   Due to the critical functions to be supported, CNPC links should in general operate in protected
spectrum. Currently two such bands have been allocated, namely the L-band (960-977MHz) and the
C-band (5030-5091MHz) [7]. Furthermore, although the direct links between GCS and UAVs (primary
CNPC links) are always preferred for delay reasons, secondary CNPC links via satellite could also be
exploited as a backup to enhance reliability and robustness. Another key requirement for CNPC links is
the superior high security. In particular, effective security mechanisms should be employed to avoid the
so-called ghost control scenario, a potentially catastrophic situation in which the UAVs are controlled
by unauthorized agents via spoofed control or navigation signals. Therefore, powerful authentication
techniques, possibly complemented by the emerging physical layer security techniques, should be applied
for CNPC links.



February 12, 2016                                                                                 DRAFT
                                                                                                           6


B. Data Link

   The data links, on the other hand, aim to support mission-related communications for the ground
terminals, which, depending on the application scenarios, may include terrestrial base stations (BSs),
mobile terminals, gateway nodes, wireless sensors, etc. Taking the UAV-aided ubiquitous coverage shown
in Fig 1(a) as an example, the data links maintained by the UAVs need to support the following
communication modes: i) direct mobile-UAV communication as for BS offloading or during complete
BS malfunction; ii) UAV-BS and UAV-gateway wireless backhaul; iii) UAV-UAV wireless backhaul. The
capacity requirement for these data links critically depends on the applications, possibly ranging from
several kbps in UAV-sensor links to dozens of Gbps in UAV-gateway wireless backhaul. Compared to
CNPC links, the data links usually have higher tolerance in terms of latency and security requirements. In
terms of spectrum, the UAV data links could reuse the existing band assigned for the particular applications
to be supported, e.g., the LTE band while assisting cellular coverage, or dedicated new spectrum could
be allocated for enhanced performance, e.g., using millimeter wave (mmWave) band for high capacity
UAV-UAV wireless backhaul [8].


                                   III. C HANNEL C HARACTERISTICS

   Both CNPC and data links in UAV-aided communications consist of two types of channels, namely
UAV-ground and UAV-UAV channels, which exhibit several unique characteristics as compared to the
extensively studied terrestrial communication channels.


A. UAV-Ground Channel

   While the air-ground channels for aeronautical applications with piloted aircrafts are well understood,
systematic measurements and modeling of UAV-ground channels are still ongoing [7], [9]. Unlike piloted
aircraft systems, where the ground sites are usually in open areas with tall antenna towers, the UAV-
ground channels for UASs are more complicated due to the more complex operation environment. While
LoS links are expected for such channels in most scenarios, they could also be occasionally blocked by
obstacles such as terrain, buildings, or the airframe itself. In particular, recent measurements have shown
that the UAV-ground channels could suffer from severe airframe shadowing with a duration up to dozens
of seconds during aircraft maneuvering [9], which needs to be taken into account for mission-critical
operations. For low-altitude UAVs, the UAV-ground channels may also constitute a number of multi-path
components due to reflection, scattering, and diffraction by mountains, ground surface, foliage, etc. For

February 12, 2016                                                                                     DRAFT
                                                                                                        7


UAVs operating over desert or sea, the two-ray model has been mostly used due to the dominance of the
LoS and the surface reflection components. Another widely used model is the stochastic Rician fading
model, which consists of a deterministic LoS component, and a random scattered component with certain
statistical distributions. Depending on the environment surrounding the ground terminals as well as the
frequency used, the UAV-ground channels exhibit widely varying Rician factors, i.e., the power ratio
between the LoS and the scattered components, with typical values around 15 dB for L-band and 28 dB
for C-band in hilly terrain [7].


B. UAV-UAV Channel

   The UAV-UAV channels are mainly dominated by the LoS component. Although there may exist limited
multipath fading due to ground reflections, its impact is minimal as compared to that experienced in UAV-
ground or ground-ground channels. In addition, the UAV-UAV channels may have even higher Doppler
frequencies than the UAV-ground counterparts, due to the potentially large relative velocity between
UAVs. Such channel characteristics have direct implications on spectrum allocation for UAV-UAV links.
On one hand, the dominance of LoS links may suggest that the emerging mmWave communications
could be employed to achieve high-capacity UAV-UAV wireless backhaul. On the other hand, the high
relative velocity between UAVs coupled with the higher frequency in the mmWave band could lead to
excessive Doppler shift. More in-depth studies are needed to find out the most suitable technology to use
in UAV-UAV links, given their unique channel characteristics.


                                   IV. M AIN D ESIGN C ONSIDERATIONS

   This section presents the main design considerations specifically for wireless communications with
UAVs. The following three aspects are discussed: UAV path planning, energy-aware deployment and
operation, and multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communications in UASs.


A. UAV Deployment and Path Planning

   One important design aspect of UASs is UAV path planning [10], [11]. For UAV-aided communications
in particular, appropriate path planning may significantly shorten the communication distance and thus
is crucial for high-capacity performance. Unfortunately, finding the optimal flying path for UAV is a
challenging task in general. On one hand, UAV path optimization problems essentially involve an infinite
number of variables due to the continuous UAV trajectory to be determined. On the other hand, the


February 12, 2016                                                                                  DRAFT
                                                                                                             8


problems are also usually subject to a variety of practical constraints, e.g., connectivity, fuel limitation,
collision and terrain avoidance, many of which are time-varying in nature and are difficult to model
accurately. One useful method for UAV path planning is to approximate the UAV dynamics by a
discrete-time state space, with the state vector typically consisting of the position and velocity in a three-
dimensional (3D) coordinate system. The UAV trajectory is then given by the sequence of states, which
are subject to finite transition constraints to reflect the practical UAV mobility limitations. Many of the
resulting problems with such an approximation belong to the class of mixed integer linear programming
(MILP) [11], which can be solved with well-developed software packages.
   Intuitively, the optimal UAV flight path critically depends on the application scenarios. For instance,
for UAV-aided cellular coverage as shown in Fig. 1(a), it is evident that more than one UAVs should be
jointly deployed above the serving areas to cooperatively achieve real-time communications with ground
users; whereas for UAV-aided information dissemination or collection for delay-tolerant data, as shown
in Fig. 1(c), it could be sufficient to despatch one single UAV to fly over the area to communicate with
the ground nodes sequentially. Furthermore, for the cellular coverage application, one option is to employ
rotary-wing UAVs that hover above the coverage area, serving as static aerial base stations. In this case,
no dedicated path planning is needed. Instead, the main design problems for UAV deployment usually
involve finding the optimal UAV separations as well as their hovering altitude to achieve maximum
coverage. Note that for a typical urban environment, there in general exists an optimal UAV altitude in
terms of coverage maximization, which is due to the following non-trivial tradeoff: While increasing UAV
altitude will lead to higher free space path loss, it also increases the possibility of having LoS links with
the ground terminals. Such a tradeoff has been characterized in [12], [13], based on which the optimal
UAV altitude has been obtained.


B. Energy-Aware Deployment and Operation

   The performance and operational duration of a UAS is fundamentally constrained by the limited
onboard energy. Although powerplant and energy-storage technologies have advanced dramatically over
the past few decades, limited energy availability still severely hampers UAV endurance. From the opera-
tional perspective, this problem can be addressed through two approaches. First, effective energy-aware
deployment mechanisms are needed for timely onboard energy replenishment, yet without noticeable
interruption of the communication services supported. Second, energy-efficient operation through smart
energy management is required, i.e., accomplishing the missions with minimum energy consumption.


February 12, 2016                                                                                       DRAFT
                                                                                                           9


      In terms of energy-aware deployment, one effective approach is to exploit the inter-UAV cooperation
to enable sequential energy replenishment. For instance, at any one time, only one UAV is scheduled to
leave the serving area for energy replenishment, during which the service gap is temporarily filled by
neighboring UAVs via e.g., increasing the transmission power and/or adjusting the aircraft positions. This
energy replenishment scheduling can be matched to the dynamic load patterns that need to be supported
by the UAVs. For instance, it might be preferred to schedule energy replenishment only when low data
traffic is expected, e.g., during night time for the cellular coverage application. Note that apart from the
commonly used energy sources such as electric batteries or liquid fuels, there has been increasing interest
in powering UAVs by solar energy or dedicated wireless energy transfer technology via e.g. laser beams.1
      Energy-efficient operation, on the other hand, aims to reduce unnecessary energy consumption by
the UAVs. As the main energy usage of UAVs is to support either aircraft propulsion or wireless
communications, energy-efficient operation schemes can be broadly classified into two categories. The first
one is energy-efficient mobility, for which the movement of the UAVs should be carefully controlled by
taking into account the energy consumption associated with every maneuver. For instance, unnecessary
aircraft maneuvering or ascending should be avoided since they are generally quite energy-intensive.
Energy-efficient mobility schemes can usually be designed with path planning optimization, by using
appropriate energy consumption models as a function of UAV speed, acceleration, altitude, etc. The
other category of energy-efficient operation is energy-efficient communication, which aims to satisfy the
communication requirement with the minimum energy expenditure on communication-related functions,
such as communication circuits, signal transmission, etc. To this end, one common approach is to optimize
the communication strategies to maximize the energy efficiency (EE) in bits/Joule, i.e., the number
of successfully communicated data bits per unit energy consumption. Note that while energy-efficient
communication has been extensively studied for terrestrial communications, its systematic investigation
for UAV communication systems is still under-developed.


C. MIMO for UAV-Aided Communications

      Although MIMO technology has been extensively implemented in terrestrial communication systems
due to its high spectral efficiency and superior diversity performance, its application in UASs is still
hindered by several factors. First, the lack of rich scattering in UAS environment considerably limits
the spatial multiplexing gain of MIMO, which usually leads to only marginal rate improvement over

  1
      See the company website http://lasermotive.com/ for more details.


February 12, 2016                                                                                     DRAFT
                                                                                                           10


single-antenna systems. Besides, the high signal processing complexity as well as the hardware and power
consumption costs make it quite costly to employ multiple antennas in UAVs due to the SWAP limitations.
Furthermore, MIMO systems rely on accurate channel state information (CSI) for best performance.
However, this is practically difficult to achieve in a highly dynamic environment, therefore further limiting
the practical MIMO gain in UASs.
   Despite the above challenges, some recent results still show a great potential for MIMO technology in
UASs. In particular, in contrast to the common conception that spatial multiplexing gain is fundamentally
limited by the number of signal paths, it has been found that high spatial multiplexing gain may also
be attainable even in LoS channels, by carefully designing the antenna separation with respect to carrier
wavelength and link distance [14], though this usually requires large antenna separation, high carrier
frequency, and short communication range. Alternatively, a more practical way to reap the multiplexing
gain in poor scattering environment is to leverage multi-user MIMO, by simultaneously serving a number
of sufficiently separated ground terminals with angular separations exceeding the angular resolution of the
antenna array installed on the UAVs. In this case, the signals for different terminals are distinguishable
by the UAV array, and thus restores the MIMO spatial multiplexing gain. Another way of utilizing
MIMO in UASs is through mmWave communications, for which the MIMO array gain, instead of the
spatial multiplexing gain, is more critical due to the large available bandwidth as well as the high
signal attenuation. However, due to the high mobility of UAVs, it would be quite challenging to achieve
transmitter/receiver beam alignment for directional mmWave communications, an issue that needs to be
properly addressed before mmWave MIMO could be practically employed in UAV systems.


                      V. C OMMUNICATIONS WITH UAV C ONTROLLED M OBILITY

   The high mobility of UAVs offers unique opportunities for performance improvement in UAV-aided
communications. In this section, we discuss two key techniques for wireless communications with UAV
controlled mobility, which are UAV-enabled mobile relaying and device-to-device (D2D)-enhanced UAV
information dissemination.


A. UAV-Enabled Mobile Relaying

   Relaying is an extensively studied technique in terrestrial communication systems for throughput/reliability
improvement as well as range extension. Due to the practical constraints such as limited mobility and
wired backhauls, most relays in terrestrial systems are deployed in fixed locations, which we term as static


February 12, 2016                                                                                      DRAFT
                                                                                                                            11




                                                     (a) A schematic of the UAV-enabled mobile relaying
                                           102
                                                                                                 Static
                                                                                                 Mobile, v=40m/s
                                           100
                                                                                                 Mobile, v=70m/s
                                                                                                 Mobile, v=100m/s
                                            98


                                            96
                          Path Loss (dB)




                                            94


                                            92


                                            90


                                            88


                                            86
                                                 0        5      10     15         20       25     30      35       40
                                                                             Time (seconds)


                                                       (b) Path loss with static versus mobile relaying

   Fig. 3: UAV-enabled mobile relaying and the corresponding path loss of the communication links.



relaying. To further exploit the UAV controlled mobility, we present in this subsection a UAV-enabled
mobile relaying strategy, which works particularly well for delay-tolerant applications.
   With mobile relaying, the UAV flies continuously between the source and destination aiming to reduce
the link distances during both UAV information reception and relaying phases. For example, with half-
duplex decode-and-forward (DF) mobile relaying, each relaying cycle consists of two phases each with
duration δ seconds, where δ is determined by the maximum tolerable delay. As illustrated in Fig. 3(a),
the first phase corresponds to UAV information reception, where it keeps receiving and decoding the
information sent from the source and stores in its data buffer. Concurrently, starting from the initial
position at the middle point between the source and destination, the UAV first flies towards the source at
a maximum possible speed v, and then flies back timely so that it returns to the initial position at the end

February 12, 2016                                                                                                        DRAFT
                                                                                                           12


of the first phase (t = δ). Note that if v and/or δ is sufficiently large, the UAV will have time to hover
above the source before returning so as to enjoy the best channel for data reception. In the second phase
starting from t = δ, the UAV sends the data in its buffer to the destination. This is accompanied by a
symmetric UAV movement, where it first flies towards the destination, hovers above the nearest location
to the destination if time allows, and then returns to the initial position at the end of the cycle (t = 2δ).
It is evident that compared to static relaying with the fixed UAV location at the same initial position, the
proposed mobile relaying strategy always enjoys a shorter link distance (or better average channel) in
each of the two phases of information reception and relaying. This is illustrated in Fig. 3(b) with δ = 20
seconds under different UAV velocity and a constant height H = 100 m. The carrier frequency is 5 GHz
and the source and destination are assumed to be separated by R = 1 km. It is observed from Fig. 3(b)
that with higher UAV speed limitation, mobile relaying enjoys larger link gains over static relaying. In
particular, for sufficiently large UAV maximum speed, e.g., v = 100m/s, the UAV would be able to stay
stationary above the source and destination each for about 10 seconds, during which the path loss remains
at a constant value that is about 14 dB lower than that of the static relaying.
   By employing adaptive rate transmission, the proposed mobile relaying strategy can achieve significant
throughput improvement over the conventional static relaying. This is illustrated in Fig. 4, where the
end-to-end spectrum efficiency in bps/Hz is plotted against the maximum tolerable delay δ for different
UAV velocity. Both the source and the UAV are assumed to transmit with a constant power P , with
P setting to a value so that the average received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the UAV for the static
relaying is 10 dB. Note that the direct link between source and destination is assumed to be blocked
and thus ignored. For simplicity, we assume that the Doppler effect due to UAV’s mobility has been
well compensated. It is observed that for sufficiently high delay tolerance δ, the mobile relaying strategy
achieves a throughput more than twice of that by static relaying. Furthermore, for any fixed δ, larger
throughput is achieved for higher UAV velocity, which is as expected.
   Note that an alternative strategy of mobile relaying is known as data ferrying or load-carry-and-
delivery [5]. With this strategy, the UAV “loads” the data from the source as it reaches the nearest
possible location from the source, flies towards the destination with the loaded data until it reaches the
nearest possible location to the destination, and then delivers the data to the destination. As data ferrying
has less communication time than the proposed mobile relaying, its achievable throughput is expected to
be smaller, especially for cases with low UAV speed and/or stringent delay requirement. Furthermore, in
the above discussions, a data buffer with sufficiently large buffer size is assumed at the UAV. In general,


February 12, 2016                                                                                      DRAFT
                                                                                                                                     13


                                                               4




                                                              3.5




                               Spectrum efficiency (bps/Hz)
                                                               3
                                                                                                             Static
                                                                                                             Mobile, v=40m/s
                                                                                                             Mobile, v=70m/s
                                                                                                             Mobile, v=100m/s
                                                              2.5




                                                               2




                                                              1.5
                                                                    0   20          40              60           80         100
                                                                             Maximum tolerable delay δ (seconds)



     Fig. 4: Spectrum efficiency versus maximum tolerable delay with mobile versus static relaying.


there exists a trade-off between on-board buffer size and achievable throughput in the mobile relaying
design.


B. D2D-Enhanced UAV Information Dissemination

   D2D communication is an effective technique for capacity improvement in terrestrial communication
systems [15]. The main idea is to offload the BS by enabling direct communications between nearby
mobile terminals. For UAV-aided communication systems, D2D communication is expected to play an
important role by providing the additional benefits such as UAV energy saving, lower capacity requirement
for UAV wireless backhaul, etc. Many existing D2D techniques for terrestrial communication systems,
such as those on interference mitigation and spectrum sharing, can be directly applied in UAV-aided
communications, especially in the scenario to support ubiquitous cellular coverage as shown in Fig. 1(a).
On the other hand, new D2D communication techniques could be devised by exploiting the unique
characteristics of UAV-aided communications. In the following, we present one such technique, termed
D2D-enhanced UAV information dissemination, which aims to achieve efficient information dissemination
to a large number of ground nodes by exploiting both D2D communications and the UAV mobility.
   As illustrated in Fig. 1(c), we consider the scenario where one UAV flies over a certain area to distribute
a common file to a large number of ground nodes. One simple approach to achieve this is by letting the
UAV repeatedly transmit the same file as it flies over different ground nodes, until all of them successfully
receive the file. It is not difficult to see that such a scheme requires substantial UAV retransmissions,
and its performance is essentially limited by the ground terminals which experience the weakest channel


February 12, 2016                                                                                                                 DRAFT
                                                                                                       14



                                  v




                         Phase I: UAV information broadcasting         Phase II: D2D file sharing



              Fig. 5: The two-phase protocol of D2D-enhanced UAV information dissemination.


conditions with the UAV. The D2D-enhanced information dissemination scheme can effectively solve
this problem with a two-phase protocol, as illustrated in Fig. 5. In the first phase, the UAV broadcasts
the appropriately coded file to the ground nodes as it flies over them. Since each node has only limited
wireless connectivity with the UAV, it is very likely that it can only successfully receive a fraction of
the file, where different portions of the file are received by different nodes. In the second phase, the
ground nodes exchange their respectively received data via D2D communications, until all the nodes
receive a sufficient number of packets to successfully decode the file. This scheme significantly reduces
the number of UAV retransmissions and as a result the total flying time of the UAV, which saves its
energy and is particularly useful for small UAVs with limited onboard energy. Notice that if the ground
nodes are distributed over a wide geographical area, efficient node clustering algorithms can be applied,
to improve the file sharing performance of short-range D2D communications within each cluster. The
joint optimization of the UAV path planning, coding, node clustering, as well as D2D file sharing for
this scenario is an important problem for future research.


                                                    VI. C ONCLUSIONS

   In this article, we have provided an overview on UAV-aided wireless communications with the help
of three use cases: UAV-aided ubiquitous coverage, UAV-aided relaying, and UAV-aided information
dissemination. The basic networking architecture and main channel characteristics were introduced.
Furthermore, the key design considerations for UAV communications were also discussed. Lastly, we
highlighted two key performance enhancing techniques by utilizing the UAV controlled mobility, including
UAV-enabled mobile relaying and D2D-enhanced UAV information dissemination. It is hoped that the


February 12, 2016                                                                                   DRAFT
                                                                                                                                       15


challenges and opportunities described in this article will help pave the way for researchers to design
and build UAV-enhanced wireless communications systems in the future.


                                                            R EFERENCES

 [1] K. P. Valavanis and G. J. Vachtsevanos, Handbook of unmanned aerial vehicles. Springer Netherlands, 2015.
 [2] US Department of Transportation, “Unmanned aircraft system (UAS) service demand 2015–2035: Literature review & projections of
     future usage,” Tech. Rep., v.0.1, DOT-VNTSC-DoD-13-01, Sep. 2013.
 [3] A. Merwaday and I. Guvenc, “UAV assisted heterogeneous networks for public safety communications,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless
     Commun. Netw. Conf., pp. 329–334, 9-12 Mar. 2015.
 [4] A. Osseiran et al., “Scenarios for 5G mobile and wireless communications: the vision of the METIS project,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
     vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 26–35, May 2014.
 [5] E. W. Frew and T. X. Brown, “Airborne communication networks for small unmanned aircraft systems,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 96, no. 12,
     pp. 2008–2027, Dec. 2008.
 [6] N. Goddemeier, K. Daniel, and C. Wietfeld, “Role-based connectivity management with realistic air-to-ground channels for cooperative
     UAVs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 951–963, Jun. 2012.
 [7] D. W. Matolak and R. Sun, “Unmanned aircraft systems: air-ground channel characterization for future applications,” IEEE Veh.
     Technol. Mag., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 79–85, Jun. 2015.
 [8] T. S. Rappaport, R. W. Heath Jr, R. C. Daniels, and J. N. Murdock, Millimeter wave wireless communications. Prentice Hall, 2014.
 [9] R. Sun and D. W. Matolak, “Initial results for airframe shadowing in L- and C-band air-ground channels,” in Proc. Integrated Commun.,
     Navigation, and Surveillance Conf., pp. 1–8, Apr. 2015.
[10] Z. Han, A. L. Swindlehurst, and K. J. R. Liu, “Optimization of MANET connectivity via smart deployment/movement of unmanned
     air vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 3533–3546, Sep. 2009.
[11] T. Schouwenaars, B. D. Moor, E. Feron, and J. How, “Mixed integer programming for multi-vehicle path planning,” in Proc. European
     Control Conf., pp. 2603–2608, 2001.
[12] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 3,
     no. 6, pp. 569–572, Dec. 2014.
[13] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah, “Drone small cells in the clouds: Design, deployment and performance analysis,”
     in Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf. (GLOBECOM), San Diego, CA, USA, Dec. 2015.
[14] F. Bohagen, P. Orten, and G. E. Oien, “Design of optimal high-rank line-of-sight MIMO channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
     vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1420–1425, Apr. 2007.
[15] A. Asadi, Q. Wang, and V. Mancuso, “A survey on device-to-device communication in cellular networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
     Tuts., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1801–1819, Apr. 2014.




February 12, 2016                                                                                                                 DRAFT
